You can raise your own exceptions: raise Exception(‘This is the error message.')
You can also use assertions: assert condition, ‘Error message'
Assertions are for detecting programmer errors that are not meant to be recovered from. User errors should raise exceptions.

The logging module lets you display logging messages.
Log messages create a "breadcrumb trail" of what your program is doing.
After calling logging.basicConfig() to set up logging, call logging.debug(‘This is the message') to create a log message.
When done, you can disable the log messages with logging.disable(logging.CRITICAL)
Don't use print() for log messages: It's hard to remove the mall when you're done debugging.
The five log levels are: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR, and CRITICAL.
You can also log to a file instead of the screen with the filename keyword argument in the logging.basicConfig() function.

example use of logging
import logging
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG, formal='&(asctime)s - %(levelname)s - %(message)s')\
use logging.debug('') to add your log message

to save the log to a filename instead of showing in the program add filrname att. to the basicConfig() method
logging.basicConfig(filename='fiename.txt', level=logging.DEBUG, formal='&(asctime)s - %(levelname)s - %(message)s')

The debugger is a tool that lets you execute Python code one instruction at a time and shows you the values in variables.
Open the Debug Control window with Debug > Debugger before running the program.
The Over button will step over the current line of code and pause on the next one.
The Step button will step into a function call.
The Out button will step out of the current function you are in.
The Go button will continue the program until the next breakpoint or until the end of the program if there are no breakpoints.
The Quit button will immediately terminate the program.
Breakpoints are lines where the debugger will pause and let you choose when to continue running the program.
Breakpoints can be set by right-clicking the file editor window and selecting "Set Breakpoint"